Documentation/philosophy.md, before:

# Philosophy and Features

This is the opinionated side of SwiftObserver. I invite you put it on like a shoe. See if it fits, take it for what it's worth and evolve it via PR or email: <swiftobserver@flowtoolz.com>.

* [What You Might Like](#what-you-might-like)
  * [Meaningful Code](#meaningful-code)
  * [Non-intrusive Design](#non-intrusive-design)
  * [Simplicity and Flexibility](#simplicity-and-flexibility)
  * [Safety](#safety)
* [Combined Observation is Overrated](#combined-observation-is-overrated)
* [What You Might Not Like](#what-you-might-not-like)

# What You Might Like

## Meaningful Code

* Readable code down to the internals

  > We comb internal code with as much regularity and care as if it was public API, so you can peek under the hood to understand SwiftObserver perfectly.

* Meaningful expressive metaphors

  * No arbitrary, contrived or technical metaphors like "disposable", "dispose bag", "signal", "emitter", "stream" or "sequence"


  > A note on "signals": In the tradition of Elm and the origins of reactive programming,  many reactive libraries use "signal" as a metaphor, but how they apply the term is more confusing than helpful, in particular when they suggest that the "signal" is what's being observed.
  >
  > Our closest context of reference here is information theory, where a signal is what's being technically transmitted from a source to a receiver. By observing the source, the receiver receives a signal which conveys messages. Would we apply the metaphor to reactive programming, the signal would rather correspond to the actual data that *observables* send to *observers*.

- Meaningful (semantically consistent) metaphor combinations

  > That is: no combination of incompatible metaphors that stem from completely different domains

  > A common and nonsensical mixture is "subscribing" to a "signal". Even Elm, which had signals and still has subscriptions, never mixed the two.
  >
  > "subscribing" to an "observable" doesn't make much sense either. Why isn't it a "subscribable" then? Why is it a radical idea to "observe" an "observable"? Is an "observable" a publication?

- A meaningful level of abstraction that's focused on the essential *Observer Pattern*

  > SwiftObserver is pragmatic and doesn't overgeneralize the *Observer Pattern* in any arbitrary direction. It doesn't go overboard with models like "streams" or "sequences" but keeps things more simple, real-world oriented and meaningful to actual application domains.

- Meaningful code at the point of use (no technical boilerplate)

  - For example ...
  - No mediating property on *observables* for starting observations or creating mappings
  - No "tokens" and the like to pass around or store
  - No memory management boilerplate code at the point of observation
  - No tuple destructuring in combined observations

- Meaningful syntax

  - The syntax reflects the intent and metaphor of the *Observer Pattern*: *Observers* are active subjects while *observables* are passive objects which are unconcerned about being observed:

    ```swift
    dog.observe(sky)
    observer.observe(observable)
    subject.actUpon(object)
    ```

  > Note: Many definitions of the *Observer Pattern*, including [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Observer_pattern), have the subject / object roles reversed, which we consider not merely a misnomer but, above all, a secondary level of analysis.
  >
  > They look at observation from a technical rather than a conceptual point of view, focusing on *how* the problem is being *solved* rather than *what* the solution *means*.
  >
  > The illusion the *Observer Pattern* is supposed to create is that an *observer* observes an *observable*. Linguistically, that is: subject, predicate, object. The subject actively acts on the object, while the object is passively being acted upon.
  >
  > Of course, to achieve this under the hood, *observables* must actively trigger some data propagation. But we should look at the solution more pragmatically in terms of the real-world meaning that we set out to model in the first place.

## Non-intrusive Design

- No delegate protocols to implement

- Custom *observables* without having to inherit from any base class

  - You're in control of the ancestral tree of your classes.
  - All classes can easily be observed, even views and view controllers.
  - You can keep model and logic code independent of any observer frameworks and techniques.

  > If the model layer had to be stuffed with heavyweight constructs just to be observed, it would become a technical issue rather than an easy to change,  meaningful, direct representation of domain-, business- and view logic.

- No restrictions on how you organize, store or persist the state of your your app

  * You can freely model your domain-, business- and view logic with all your familiar design patterns and types.

- No optional optionals

  - You have full control over value and *message* types.
  - You can make your *message* types optional. SwiftObserver will never spit them back at you wrapped in additional optionals, not even in combined observations.
  - You can easily unwrap optional *messages* via the *mapping* `unwrap`.

- No under the hood side effects in terms of ownership and life cycles

  * You stay in control of when objects die and of which objects own which others.
  * Your code stays explicit.

- Minimal duplication

  - SwiftObserver practically never duplicates the *messages* that are being sent around, in particular in [combined observations](#combined-observations) and [*mappings*](#mappings). This is in stark contrast to other reactive libraries yet without compomising functional aspects. The only cases that duplicate *messages* are `latestMessage` on `Weak` and (if you don't change `remembersLatestMessage`) on `Messenger`.

  > Note: Not having to duplicate data where multiple things must be observed is one of the reasons to use combined observations in the first place. However, some reactive libraries choose to not make full use of object-orientation, so far that the combined observables could be value types. This forces these libraries to duplicate data by buffering the messages sent from observables.
  >
  > SwiftObserver not only leverages object-orientation, it also combines the typical reactive "push model" in which observables push their messages to observers with a regular "pull model" in which observers can pull messages from observables.
  >
  > "Pulling" just reflects the natural way objects operate. Observers can act on observables without problem, since that is the actual technical direction of control and dependence. The problem that reactive techiques solve is propagating data **against** the direction of control. 
  >
  > A "pull model" is also more in line with functional programming: Instead of buffering state, the combined observation calls and combines functions on observables.

## Simplicity and Flexibility

- Very few simple but universal concepts and types

- Pure Swift for clean modelling, not even any dependence on `Foundation`

- *Mappings* are first-class *observables* that can be treated like any other *observable*

- One universal consistent syntax for transforming *messages* and chaining these transformations

- Use a small but universal set of prebuilt transformations wherever you transform *messages*:

  - `map`
  - `new`
  - `unwrap`
  - `filter`
  - `select`

- One universal (combined) observation

  - One function to observe 1-3 *observables*
  - Still, you get all the power of combined observation.
  - Combined observation has no special syntax and imposes no additional cognitive load.
  - [Here's more on the nature of combined observation](#combined-observation-is-overrated)

- Create an *observable* plus a chain of *mappings* in one line.

- Observe an *observable* with an ad-hoc chain of transformations in one line.

- Create a stand-alone *mapping* independent of its *source*.

  - *Mapping sources* can be freely swapped.

- Create a stand-alone *mapping* as a chain of *mappings* in one line.

- Use the `<-` operator to directly set variable values.

- Use common operators directly on number- and string variables.

- Variables are `Codable`, so model types are easy to encode and persist.

- Pull the current *message* from any *observable* via `latestMessage`. 

- Receive the old **and** new value from variables

- Seamless integration of the *Messenger Pattern* (or *Notifier Pattern*)

- Reference any *observable* weakly by wrapping it in `Weak`

  - Hold `weak` references to *observables* in a data structure:

    ```swift
    let strongNumber = Var(12)
    var arrayOfWeakNumbers = [Weak<Var<Int>>]()
    arrayOfWeakNumbers.append(Weak(strongNumber))
    ```

  - Create mappings that hold their sources weakly:

    ```swift
    let strongNumber = Var(12)
    let toString = Weak(strongNumber).new().map { "\($0)" }
    ```

## Safety

- When an *observable* dies, **all** its observations stop automatically.
- Real memory leaks are impossible, since you can always flush out all orphaned observations.
- Stop observations in the same expressive way you start them: `observer.stopObserving(observable)`
- Stop **all** observations of an *observer* with **one** call: `observer.stopObserving()`
- Stop **all** observations of an *observable* with **one** call: `observable.stopObservations()`
- Stop **all** abandoned observations of an *observable* with **one** call: `observable.stopAbandonedObservations()`
- Stop **all** abandoned observations of **all** *observables* with **one** call: `stopAllAbandonedObservations()`.

# Combined Observation is Overrated

At one point, I was convinced combined observations are an essential part of reactive programming. Practice has changed my mind.

While SwiftObserver offers just one universal function for observing up to three *observables*, other reactive libraries dump at least the combine functions `merge`, `zip` and `combineLatest` on your brain. In SwiftObserver, `latestMessage` generally provides the latest message, so its combined observation is equivalent to `combineLatest`, which is by far the most used combine function in practice. 

You could implement `merge` and `zip` with SwiftObserver's primitives, but SwiftObserver's universal observation already covers practically all needs for combined observation. This even gets amplified by the fact that the pull model, as manifested in `latestMessage`, reduces the need to combine observations at all, since the interesting data can always be pulled from the *observables*.

As the founder of SwiftObserver, I even have to note, that I don't use combined observation anymore at all. It never offers me a benefit over single observation in practice. To the contrary: Managing observations proves to be harder when they're coupled. 

My hunch is that `merge`, `zip` and `combineLatest` in other reactive libraries originate less from practical need and more from a desire to gerneralize and to max out the metaphor of "data streams" or "sequences". The underlying conceptual mis-alignment here would be, that *observables* in an *observer-observable* relationship are really **supposed** to send **messages** rather than anonymous **data**. I'll explain why.

All that is required for dependency inversion is that the *observer* gets informed about events that it might need to react to. The *observer* then decides whether to act at all, how to act and what data it requires, and it pulls exactly that data from wherever it needs to, including from *observables*. It is not the job of the *observable* to presume what data any *observer* might need. It's not supposed to depend on the *observer's* concerns, which is the whole reason why we invert that dependency through the *Observer Pattern*. The *observable's* job is just to tell what happened. 

So, in a clean decoupled design that adheres to the idea of the *ObserverPattern*, *observables* naturally send **messages** rather than **data**, and combining *messages* wouldn't be as meaningful or helpful.

# What You Might Not Like

- Not conform to Rx (the semi standard of reactive programming)
- SwiftObserver is focused on the foundation of reactive programming. UI bindings are available as [UIObserver](https://github.com/flowtoolz/UIObserver), but that framework is still in its infancy. You're welcome to make PRs.
- Observers and observables must be objects and cannot be of value types. However:
  1. Variables can hold any type of values and observables can send any type of messages. 
  2. We found that entities active enough to observe or significant enough to be observed are typically not mere values that are being passed around. What's being passed around are the messages that observables send to observers, and those messages are prototypical value types.
  3. For fine granular observing, the `Var` type is appropriate, further reducing the "need" (or shall we say "anti pattern"?) to observe value types.

Commit message:

Document the thought process behind the limitation on combined observation

Documentation/philosophy.md, after:

# Philosophy and Features

This is the opinionated side of SwiftObserver. I invite you put it on like a shoe. See if it fits, take it for what it's worth and evolve it via PR or email: <swiftobserver@flowtoolz.com>.

* [What You Might Like](#what-you-might-like)
  * [Meaningful Code](#meaningful-code)
  * [Non-intrusive Design](#non-intrusive-design)
  * [Simplicity and Flexibility](#simplicity-and-flexibility)
  * [Safety](#safety)
* [Combined Observation is Overrated](#combined-observation-is-overrated)
* [What You Might Not Like](#what-you-might-not-like)

# What You Might Like

## Meaningful Code

* Readable code down to the internals

  > We comb internal code with as much regularity and care as if it was public API, so you can peek under the hood to understand SwiftObserver perfectly.

* Meaningful expressive metaphors

  * No arbitrary, contrived or technical metaphors like "disposable", "dispose bag", "signal", "emitter", "stream" or "sequence"


  > A note on "signals": In the tradition of Elm and the origins of reactive programming,  many reactive libraries use "signal" as a metaphor, but how they apply the term is more confusing than helpful, in particular when they suggest that the "signal" is what's being observed.
  >
  > Our closest context of reference here is information theory, where a signal is what's being technically transmitted from a source to a receiver. By observing the source, the receiver receives a signal which conveys messages. Would we apply the metaphor to reactive programming, the signal would rather correspond to the actual data that *observables* send to *observers*.

- Meaningful (semantically consistent) metaphor combinations

  > That is: no combination of incompatible metaphors that stem from completely different domains

  > A common and nonsensical mixture is "subscribing" to a "signal". Even Elm, which had signals and still has subscriptions, never mixed the two.
  >
  > "subscribing" to an "observable" doesn't make much sense either. Why isn't it a "subscribable" then? Why is it a radical idea to "observe" an "observable"? Is an "observable" a publication?

- A meaningful level of abstraction that's focused on the essential *Observer Pattern*

  > SwiftObserver is pragmatic and doesn't overgeneralize the *Observer Pattern* in any arbitrary direction. It doesn't go overboard with models like "streams" or "sequences" but keeps things more simple, real-world oriented and meaningful to actual application domains.

- Meaningful code at the point of use (no technical boilerplate)

  - For example ...
  - No mediating property on *observables* for starting observations or creating mappings
  - No "tokens" and the like to pass around or store
  - No memory management boilerplate code at the point of observation
  - No tuple destructuring in combined observations

- Meaningful syntax

  - The syntax reflects the intent and metaphor of the *Observer Pattern*: *Observers* are active subjects while *observables* are passive objects which are unconcerned about being observed:

    ```swift
    dog.observe(sky)
    observer.observe(observable)
    subject.actUpon(object)
    ```

  > Note: Many definitions of the *Observer Pattern*, including [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Observer_pattern), have the subject / object roles reversed, which we consider not merely a misnomer but, above all, a secondary level of analysis.
  >
  > They look at observation from a technical rather than a conceptual point of view, focusing on *how* the problem is being *solved* rather than *what* the solution *means*.
  >
  > The illusion the *Observer Pattern* is supposed to create is that an *observer* observes an *observable*. Linguistically, that is: subject, predicate, object. The subject actively acts on the object, while the object is passively being acted upon.
  >
  > Of course, to achieve this under the hood, *observables* must actively trigger some data propagation. But we should look at the solution more pragmatically in terms of the real-world meaning that we set out to model in the first place.

## Non-intrusive Design

- No delegate protocols to implement

- Custom *observables* without having to inherit from any base class

  - You're in control of the ancestral tree of your classes.
  - All classes can easily be observed, even views and view controllers.
  - You can keep model and logic code independent of any observer frameworks and techniques.

  > If the model layer had to be stuffed with heavyweight constructs just to be observed, it would become a technical issue rather than an easy to change,  meaningful, direct representation of domain-, business- and view logic.

- No restrictions on how you organize, store or persist the state of your your app

  * You can freely model your domain-, business- and view logic with all your familiar design patterns and types.

- No optional optionals

  - You have full control over value and *message* types.
  - You can make your *message* types optional. SwiftObserver will never spit them back at you wrapped in additional optionals, not even in combined observations.
  - You can easily unwrap optional *messages* via the *mapping* `unwrap`.

- No under the hood side effects in terms of ownership and life cycles

  * You stay in control of when objects die and of which objects own which others.
  * Your code stays explicit.

- Minimal duplication

  - SwiftObserver practically never duplicates the *messages* that are being sent around, in particular in [combined observations](#combined-observations) and [*mappings*](#mappings). This is in stark contrast to other reactive libraries yet without compomising functional aspects. The only cases that duplicate *messages* are `latestMessage` on `Weak` and (if you don't change `remembersLatestMessage`) on `Messenger`.

  > Note: Not having to duplicate data where multiple things must be observed is one of the reasons to use combined observations in the first place. However, some reactive libraries choose to not make full use of object-orientation, so far that the combined observables could be value types. This forces these libraries to duplicate data by buffering the messages sent from observables.
  >
  > SwiftObserver not only leverages object-orientation, it also combines the typical reactive "push model" in which observables push their messages to observers with a regular "pull model" in which observers can pull messages from observables.
  >
  > "Pulling" just reflects the natural way objects operate. Observers can act on observables without problem, since that is the actual technical direction of control and dependence. The problem that reactive techiques solve is propagating data **against** the direction of control. 
  >
  > A "pull model" is also more in line with functional programming: Instead of buffering state, the combined observation calls and combines functions on observables.

## Simplicity and Flexibility

- Very few simple but universal concepts and types

- Pure Swift for clean modelling, not even any dependence on `Foundation`

- *Mappings* are first-class *observables* that can be treated like any other *observable*

- One universal consistent syntax for transforming *messages* and chaining these transformations

- Use a small but universal set of prebuilt transformations wherever you transform *messages*:

  - `map`
  - `new`
  - `unwrap`
  - `filter`
  - `select`

- One universal (combined) observation

  - One function to observe 1-3 *observables*
  - Still, you get all the power of combined observation.
  - Combined observation has no special syntax and imposes no additional cognitive load.
  - [Here's more on the nature of combined observation](#combined-observation-is-overrated)

- Create an *observable* plus a chain of *mappings* in one line.

- Observe an *observable* with an ad-hoc chain of transformations in one line.

- Create a stand-alone *mapping* independent of its *source*.

  - *Mapping sources* can be freely swapped.

- Create a stand-alone *mapping* as a chain of *mappings* in one line.

- Use the `<-` operator to directly set variable values.

- Use common operators directly on number- and string variables.

- Variables are `Codable`, so model types are easy to encode and persist.

- Pull the current *message* from any *observable* via `latestMessage`. 

- Receive the old **and** new value from variables

- Seamless integration of the *Messenger Pattern* (or *Notifier Pattern*)

- Reference any *observable* weakly by wrapping it in `Weak`

  - Hold `weak` references to *observables* in a data structure:

    ```swift
    let strongNumber = Var(12)
    var arrayOfWeakNumbers = [Weak<Var<Int>>]()
    arrayOfWeakNumbers.append(Weak(strongNumber))
    ```

  - Create mappings that hold their sources weakly:

    ```swift
    let strongNumber = Var(12)
    let toString = Weak(strongNumber).new().map { "\($0)" }
    ```

## Safety

- When an *observable* dies, **all** its observations stop automatically.
- Real memory leaks are impossible, since you can always flush out all orphaned observations.
- Stop observations in the same expressive way you start them: `observer.stopObserving(observable)`
- Stop **all** observations of an *observer* with **one** call: `observer.stopObserving()`
- Stop **all** observations of an *observable* with **one** call: `observable.stopObservations()`
- Stop **all** abandoned observations of an *observable* with **one** call: `observable.stopAbandonedObservations()`
- Stop **all** abandoned observations of **all** *observables* with **one** call: `stopAllAbandonedObservations()`.



# Why Does SwiftObserver Limit Combined Observation?

Combined observation is limited to observables that can be pulled, i.e. they are themselves buffered and conform to `BufferedObservable`. This decision is the result of a long process, involving many practical applications, discovering what's really essential, and letting go of big fancy features, one by one.

The alternative to pulling the latest messages from the observables would be to remember all messages in the combined observation itself. SwiftObserver avoids that for a few reasons:

1. It would duplicate data.
2. It would make the messages optional, possibly introducing optional optionals into the observation chain.
3. It misrepresents filtered observables by using some outdated messages for further processing, which invites misuse. Basically, when the need to involve filtered observables in a combined observation comes up at all, it is probably misguided anyway.
4. It has emerged as part of the philosophy (or insight if you will) on which SwiftObserver is built, that combined observation is a non-essential feature to the purpose of the observer pattern, dependency inversion, reactive code design and clean architecture. I would even argue that combined observation is an anti pattern. So SwiftObserver will not blow up its complexity or compromise its elegance, consistency or principles, just to support combined observation in general. Read more on this below.

Pulling `latestMessage` works just fine and covers virtually all observables that would reasonably be part of a combined observation.

# Why Combined Observation is Overrated

At one point, I was convinced combined observations are an essential part of reactive programming. Practice has changed my mind.

While SwiftObserver offers just one universal function for observing up to three *observables*, other reactive libraries dump at least the combine functions `merge`, `zip` and `combineLatest` on your brain. In SwiftObserver, `latestMessage` generally provides the latest message, so its combined observation is equivalent to `combineLatest`, which is by far the most used combine function in practice. 

You could implement `merge` and `zip` with SwiftObserver's primitives, but SwiftObserver's universal observation already covers practically all needs for combined observation. This even gets amplified by the fact that the pull model, as manifested in `latestMessage`, reduces the need to combine observations at all, since the interesting data can always be pulled from the *observables*.

As the founder of SwiftObserver, I even have to note, that I don't use combined observation anymore at all. It never offers me a benefit over single observation in practice. To the contrary: Managing observations proves to be harder when they're coupled. 

My hunch is that `merge`, `zip` and `combineLatest` in other reactive libraries originate less from practical need and more from a desire to gerneralize and to max out the metaphor of "data streams" or "sequences". The underlying conceptual mis-alignment here would be, that *observables* in an *observer-observable* relationship are really **supposed** to send **messages** rather than anonymous **data**. I'll explain why.

All that is required for dependency inversion is that the *observer* gets informed about events that it might need to react to. The *observer* then decides whether to act at all, how to act and what data it requires, and it pulls exactly that data from wherever it needs to, including from *observables*. It is not the job of the *observable* to presume what data any *observer* might need. It's not supposed to depend on the *observer's* concerns, which is the whole reason why we invert that dependency through the *Observer Pattern*. The *observable's* job is just to tell what happened. 

So, in a clean decoupled design that adheres to the idea of the *ObserverPattern*, *observables* naturally send **messages** rather than **data**, and combining *messages* wouldn't be as meaningful or helpful.

# What You Might Not Like

- Not conform to Rx (the semi standard of reactive programming)
- SwiftObserver is focused on the foundation of reactive programming. UI bindings are available as [UIObserver](https://github.com/flowtoolz/UIObserver), but that framework is still in its infancy. You're welcome to make PRs.
- Observers and observables must be objects and cannot be of value types. However:
  1. Variables can hold any type of values and observables can send any type of messages. 
  2. We found that entities active enough to observe or significant enough to be observed are typically not mere values that are being passed around. What's being passed around are the messages that observables send to observers, and those messages are prototypical value types.
  3. For fine granular observing, the `Var` type is appropriate, further reducing the "need" (or shall we say "anti pattern"?) to observe value types.
